# Introduction

This thesis presents a detailed study and development of an application focused on sports betting odds, with an emphasis on identifying, optimizing, and notifying users about hedging opportunities. Hedging in sports betting involves placing wagers on both outcomes of a binary betting option to ensure a profit, irrespective of the final result. Such opportunities are found when the odds are structured so that the total payout exceeds the sum wagered. These opportunities typically occur during live betting situations, where a bettor places a bet either before or during a game, and due to events during hte game the odds change dramatically enough to allow the user to ensure profit by betting on the other option. Additionally, this thesis will also conduct a historical data analysis to determine the feasibility of this strategy, and when it makes sense for the bettor to hedge.

## Motivation

The impetus behind this research stems from two principal aims. The first is to create an application where a bettor can inform the application of a bet they made on another platform, and the application will be able to mathematically determine and notify the bettor if there is a hedging opportunity available, and inform them of what they would need to bet to maximize profit. The second aim is to contribute to the body of knowledge in sports betting by conducting a historical analysis of betting odds, focusing on the profitability of hedging your bets and when a bettor should do so. This part of the research aims to provide insights into the mechanics and strategic use of hedging bets. The overarching goal is to offer a tool that not only aids bettors in making more informed decisions but also helps in curbing the adverse effects of gambling, such as addiction and financial losses.

This tool and research are necessary due to the rapidly growing size of the sports betting industry an the lack of research regarding betting strategies and tools that can be used to both increase profitability and decrease gambling addiction risk. Most of the research done thus far has been conducted in Europe which has completely different gambling laws and regulations as well as a very different sports culture than what is seen in America, so there must be more research done in the states to assess the impact and potentially positive strategies and tools that can make sport betting safer and more entertaining for United States residents. Though there are major differences, valuable insights can be taken from the research that has been done in Europe thus far. In Europe alone the gross gaming revenue of sports betting was 41.7 billion Euros in 2020, with 55% of all bets being placed during the course of a sporting event. [@MichelsOttingLangrock2023] Meanwhile, little research has been done to examine how users can maximize their odds during live betting scenarios, and the implications using a hedging strategy might have on profitability and the prevelance of problematic gambling habits.

## Current State of the Art

The landscape of sports betting research, particularly in the context of hedging strategies, is currently limited. Most of the available literature is focused on markets outside the United States, or it concentrates on predicting outcomes of sports events and identifying bets with favorable odds. This thesis distinguishes itself by not predicting outcomes or assessing odds fairness. Instead, it focuses on presenting users with profitable betting options based on current market conditions and data from the-odds-api. [@theoddsapi23] A significant aspect of this research is the historical analysis of sports betting odds, an area that has not been thoroughly explored in existing literature. This analysis extends beyond theoretical models, providing a practical examination of historical outcomes and trends in sports betting odds.

## Goals of the Project

The thesis is structured around two primary objectives. The first is a comprehensive historical analysis to ascertain the occurrence and profitability of hedging opportunities in comparison to traditional betting strategies. This involves a systematic examination of odds data from previous sporting events to identify the prevalence and profitability of hedging strategies when compared betting solely based on what you believe the outcome will be. The second objective is the development of an application that pulls in real time odds data in order to identify and notify users of hedging opportunities and how to take advantage of them.

The historical analysis portion of the thesis is critical. It not only contributes to the academic field by shedding light on various sports betting strategies and their effectiveness but also serves as a foundational element for the application. This analysis will explore questions such as the optimal timing for placing hedging bets and how often these opportunities occur and when they are a favorable option when compared to sticking with your bet. Furthermore, it will examine the financial implications of this strategy, providing a clear picture of it's potential profitability.

## Ethical Implications

This thesis acknowledges the significant ethical considerations inherent in sports betting. A primary concern is ensuring that the application and its recommendations do not inadvertently foster gambling addiction or encourage irresponsible betting practices. This involves a commitment to promoting responsible gambling, providing users with information that highlights safe betting habits and the potential risks associated with gambling. Compliance with legal and regulatory standards in sports betting is another crucial aspect of this research, ensuring that the project adheres to the ethical and legal frameworks governing the industry. By addressing these ethical issues, the thesis aims to make a positive contribution to the sports betting field, enhancing user experience while promoting responsible and ethical gambling practices.

These concerns are addressed by a few key strategies that aim to mitigate the risk of gambling addiction. First, the application does not allow the user to place bets using it, nor will it handle money of any kind. Also, the unique position and niche of this research should enable users to avoid or mitigate many of the traditional pitfalls of gambling. Research indicates that live betting is traditionally problematic for users, and much of the negative behavior is linked to the feeling of having input and options in real time, as well as the ability to chase your losses using the "cash out" button found on most modern sportsbooks, that allow you to settle your bets early for an amount tied to the probability of your bet winning. [@KillickAndGriffiths2020] My application takes some of this control out of your hand by taking attention away from the betting platform and the especially dangerous "cash out" button, and instead putting you in a place where you are given live accurate information on how and where you can profit. This should theoretically remove some of the emotional decision making that typically causes gamblers losses and feeds into problematic gambling tendencies.

This work and app are heavily limited by third-party risk, which can not be eliminated. Due to the lack of regulation around sports betting and the fact that the industry's progression is currently outpacing regulation it is hard to verify the accuracy of the odds data we are receiving. While conducting this research and testing my application I have manually verified the accuracy of the data I am receiving from *the-odds-api*, but this is in no way conclusive or comprehensive. Additionally, *the-odds-api* gives no information on how it is able to access all of the odds across different sportbooks, and makes no promises about the integrity or reliability of their data. [@theoddsapi23] This introduces a fundamental risk about the longevity and reliablility of the findings of this project and the long term maintainability of the application.However, throughout research and testing there have been no sings that the data is in any way inaccurate or compromised, but the risk still remains. Which means it must be acknowledged that this application can make no promises of 100 percent accuracy, and anyone who chooses to use the application should verify the accuracy of the data it provides **before** placing any wagers. Unfortunately, this is a problem inherent to the industry at this point in time. Even sportsbooks such as *DraftKings* will not offer any guarentees about the integrity of their own data and make sure to explicitly state as much in their terms of use. [@draftkings2023] This is a problem that cannot be avoided if any investigation into sportsbook odds data is conducted, thus my strategy of gathering and verifying data is as thorough as is possible at this point in time.

# Related work

Most of the research relevant to this topic has centered around the psychology of betting decisions and gambling addiction, attempts at algorithmically predicting outcomes, or inherent human biases that cloud sound betting decisions. My research works to learn from all of these works and add to sparsely available literature regarding sports betting. Through research it seems that the foundation for the vast majority of negative outcomes for casual bettors occur due to a lack of knowledge or understanding. Which is why my research focuses on providing bettors more information as to what their options are during a live betting situation and what actions will allow them to profit or protect themselves from losses the best.

## Lack of Knowledge 

The concept that many casual bettors can act against their own best interest due to a lack of knowledge has been explored before. Researches investigated the betting outcomes of a few particular bettors during the 2015-2016 English Premier League season, where Leicester FC had majorly outperformed expectations. They had started the season with 5000 to 1 odds to win the league, meaning a bettor could bet $1 to win $5000, and some people took this bet. As the season progressed and Leicester continued performing well, sportsbooks offered a cashout option on this bet allowing users to settle their bet for huge profits, but less than what they would receive if their bet wins. Of those interviewed, everyone who placed this bet took the cash out option which cost them a collective 8,173.47 that they would have earned had they hedged their bet instead of cashing out. The conclusion being, that users chose to take the cashout option because it is much easier to understand, and right there in their face on the betting app. [@NewallandCortis2019]

This case study shows how bettors can make decisions detrimental to themselves due to a lack of knowledge surround what their options are. A common argument against hedging, is that more capital is required in order to place the hedge bet. However the line of thought that this could be a limiting factor, or potentially harmful to the bettor is not supported by sound logic. Firstly, my research is focused on the casual gambler, who uses sports betting to enhance their sport entertainment experience. In this case, a bettor would typically not be betting more than they can afford to hedge in order to receive guarenteed profits. Even in the case where a bettor has placed a bet so large that they cannot afford to hedge, in many cases they could take out a loan in order to hedge, and still profit after paying the interest on the loan. Fundamentally, the resistance to hedge is often linked to a lack of knowledge about the strategy. Which is why my research aims to simplify and inform bettors about hedging, and take much of the mental load and math involved in calculating a successful hedge off of the bettors shoulders.

## Emotion Driven Betting

In order to successfully produce a tool and data that is beneficial to bettors, it is crucial to have an understanding of the casual bettors' betting habits and what underlying factors drive their decisions. This is a very complex question that cannot be answered within the scope of this thesis. However there are themes and indicators that can be drawn from previous research that informs this work. Many of the pitfalls that casual sport bettors often fall into can be traced back fundamentally to them letting their emotions fuel their betting decisions rather than sound logic and math. This can lead to bettors making decisions against their own interest due to the heat of the moment exacerbated by the introduction and prevalence of live betting.

Studies have shown that during live betting scenarios bettors will typically over react to positive events that occur during the game and place additional bets accordingly typically leading to losses, which causes the odds to move accordingly. [@MichelsOttingLangrock2023] This shows that most bettors are not able to accurately estimate the effect that in game events have on bet probabilities. While this research does not investigate how this relates to hedging strategies, it sheds light on some interesting phenomena. Firstly, it shows that bettors in aggregate typically over react to the in game events. Next, the odds of said bet then move accordingly due to the wave of incoming bets. This would indicate that at this point there is a discrepancy between the actual probability of an outcome, and the odds currently being offered. Which in theory, could be taken advantage of by a bettor.

This particular occurance highlights a broader issue that bettors are often unable to correctly asses risk and reward, which hinders bettors' abilities to profit and make sound bets. While this is not eliminated by this work, the only way to decrease the prevalence of these circumstances is to provide bettors with more conclusive and comprehensive information about the consequences of their bets and the options available to them. Which is why this work provides bettors with another avenue to profit from their bets. While this tool does not provide comprehensive information, the use of this application will hopefully nudge users to be more thoughtful and informed in their bets, increasing overall performance.

## Arbitrage

One distinction that needs to be clear is the terminology and phenomena that I am decribing throughout this research. There is a similar concept in the world of sports betting commonly referred to as arbitrage. However, this is not within the scope of the paper, nor commonly possible or legal in the United States. Arbitrage, as commonly defined is the concept of finding sportsbooks that have odds on the same event that vary enough that you can place bets on both side of the bet and profit instantaneously, due to the discrepancy in odds at one specific point in time. In Europe, this can also be done via secondary betting markets where a user can sell their position, however these markets are illegal in the United States. The concept of sports betting arbitrage for all intents and purposes can be compared to stock market arbitrage, a common investment strategy where an investor profits off of the price discrepancy between two different markets. 

Hedging a bet on the otherhand, is when you take advantage of odds that are changed by events in the game, by betting on both sides of a bet. The concept of arbitrage is what spurred my interest into investing the implications of hedge betting within U.S. markets, but it is not the focal point of this paper, nor is it possible in the U.S. the same way it is in Europe.

The concept using arbitrage to profit has been explored before. Researchers were able to secure a guarenteed 19.2% profit using an arbitrage strategy in 2012. [@egonetal2012arbitrage] Proving that artibrage is a very viable strategy. Which prompted my curiosity into whether similar results could be replicated using a bet hedging strategy. 

## Lack of Research

There is a very clear void in the current academic landscape when in comes to betting in the U.S. A variety of useful topics have been explored in Europe, however many of these findings are irrelevant to U.S. bettors due to different laws and regulations. Specifically when it comes to hedging strategies, it was veyr hard to find any reliable literature on the subject, especially within the context of U.S. betting laws. There is a variety of research into the pitfalls of gambling addiction when it comes to sports betting, and particularly how marketing and the advent of mobile sports betting has exacerbated problem gambling. [@KillickAndGriffiths2020] However, little research has been done into the efficacy of different betting strategies. As well as how third party tools could inform users and ward off some of the typical factors that enhance the addictive tendencies of sports betting.

This makes this work even more crucial, because while the negative impacts of sports betting have been explored it is equally as important to research how these negative aspects can be curbed. One thing that related works have made clear, is that bettors do not often make sound betting decisions and that these decisions can lead to losses on behalf of the bettor. [@MichelsOttingLangrock2023] This raises concern for my work because unlike arbitrage, hedging relies on the bettor initally making a bet that aligns with the future outcome which has been shown to be difficult. However hedging provides an opportunity for users to capitalize on a sporting event taking a turn in their preferred direction by locking in profits before the event has a chance to turn the other way. This should provide more opportunity for the user to win. Additionally, by providing the user a tool to quickly be notified of these occurance, they will have opportunities for profit that are unavailable to those who look for opportunities manually or are unaware of hedging due to the rapidly changing nature of sports odds. There is also the fact that more information is always better, when it comes to making good betting decisions, so by providing users information on their options this will always be a net positive. Addditionally, due to the construction of the application users must take their attention away from the emotion fueling sportsbook apps in order to monitor hedging opportunities, which will cut down on many of the factors that fuel problem gambling that sportsbooks often try to spur.

# Method of approach


# Experiments


## Experimental Design


## Evaluation

## Threats to Validity

# Conclusion

## Summary of Results

## Future Work

## Future Ethical Implications and Recommendations

## Conclusions


# References

::: {#refs}
:::
